Narcissistic Personality Disorder
The word narcissism is really present in our selfie-obsessed, celebrity-driven culture, often used to describe someone who seems excessively vain or full of themselves.

But in psychological terms, narcissism doesn't mean a genuine form of self-love. Narcissistic personality disorder (aka NPD) is a mental condition in which people have an inflated sense of their own importance, a deep need for excessive attention and admiration and a lack of empathy for others. But behind this mask of extreme confidence there’s a fragile self-esteem that's vulnerable to the slightest criticism. But propping up their delusions of grandeur takes a lot of work—and that's where the dysfunctional attitudes and behaviours come in.

NPD has a variety of subtypes. The four main subtypes are: Overt/Grandiose narcissist: they tend to be extroverted but also, uncooperative, selfish and overbearing. Their exaggerated self-image and high self-esteem allow them to be confident and assertive. However they’re also likely to overestimate their own emotional intelligence Covert/Vulnerable narcissist: covert narcissists are introverts; they tend to be extremely sensitive to criticism and suffer from low self-esteem. They can be defensive and passive-aggressive, and are less likely to overestimate their emotional abilities than overt narcissists. Communal narcissist: Commonly view themselves as altruistic and claim to care deeply about fairness. They present themselves to others as supportive and selfless. However, their behaviour is motivated by a desire for social power and a sense of superiority or entitlement. Because of this, their actions don’t always match their beliefs. Antagonistic narcissist: In contrast with communal narcissists, antagonistic narcissists take a highly competitive approach to social interactions. They often exhibit zero-sum thinking, believing that every situation has a “loser” and “winner.” This view of the world leads them to be aggressive and hostile. They may be quick to downgrade others and be slow or unwilling to forgive. Malignant narcissist: It can be a more destructive form of the personality disorder. In addition to the typical signs of narcissism, a malignant narcissist might be aggressive, paranoid, or sadistic—taking joy in other people’s pain. They tend to display antisocial behaviour, disregarding the rights or safety of others.

Teenagers are in the midst of forming their identities and learning how to navigate their inner and outer worlds. Therefore, they are often oversensitive, self-obsessed, and unaware of others’ needs. However, narcissism isn’t the same thing as NPD. Being a narcissistic teenager is quite different than dealing with narcissistic personality disorder. While some teens may show traits of narcissism, this may simply be typical of their age and doesn’t mean that they have or will develop NPD.

NPD is a rather hard disorder to diagnose, because of its high comorbidity with other mental disorders. However, doctors use these nine criteria to make the diagnose. If the person possesses at least five of these characteristics, they’re prone to be diagnosed as narcissists.

Signs/Complications/Causes A grandiose sense of self-importance Preoccupation with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance, beauty, or ideal love Believing that they are "special" and unique and can only be understood by, or should associate with, other special or high-status people (or institutions) Requiring excessive admiration A sense of entitlement Being interpersonally exploitative (taking advantage of others) Lacking empathy Often being envious of others or believing that others are envious of them Showing arrogant behaviours or attitudes People with NPD have trouble handling anything they perceive as criticism, which can cause them to: Become impatient or angry when they don't receive special treatment Have significant interpersonal problems and easily feel slighted React with rage and try to belittle the other person to make themselves appear superior Have difficulty regulating emotions and behaviour Experience major problems dealing with stress and adapting to change Feel depressed and moody because they fall short of perfection Have secret feelings of insecurity, shame, vulnerability and humiliation Moreover, this complications can highly affect the narcissist, having as results relationship difficulties, problems at school, depression and anxiety, physical health problems, drug or alcohol misuse and suicidal thoughts or behaviour.

How to Handle
People often describe a person with a narcissistic personality as charming and likeable, which may make it easy to overlook some of their other more harmful behaviours. However, it’s important to familiarise yourself with the signs of NPD so that they are easier to recognise. This can also help you better understand the person’s strengths and weaknesses, so you are prepared to navigate any challenges that arise. Plus, it can be the first step in learning to accept them for who they are and setting more realistic expectations about your relationship. Building a healthy self-esteem can make it much easier to handle and cope with some of the potentially harmful behaviours you may encounter when maintaining a relationship with someone with NPD. Having higher self-esteem can also make it easier to set clear boundaries, be assertive, and advocate for yourself, all of which are key to maintaining a relationship with someone with NPD. Sometimes, ignoring something or simply walking away is an appropriate response — pick your battles, right? If you feel that your boundaries have been crossed when communicating with someone with NPD, try not to react, get visibly agitated, or show annoyance. If it’s someone you’d like to keep close in your life, then you owe it to yourself to speak up. Try to do this in a calm, gentle manner. You must tell them how their words and conduct impact your life. Be specific and consistent about what’s not acceptable and how you expect to be treated, but prepare yourself for the fact that it may be challenging for them to understand or empathise with your feelings. If you can’t avoid the person, try to build up your healthy relationships and support network of people. Spending too much time in a dysfunctional relationship with someone who has a narcissistic personality can leave you emotionally drained. Rekindle old friendships and try to get new ones. Get together with family more often. If your social circle is smaller than what you would prefer, do something that allows you to meet more people you feel comfortable with. Many people with narcissistic personalities are good at making promises. They may promise to do what you want and not to do that thing you hate or promise to generally do better. Oftentimes, they are also sincere about these promises. However, in other cases, these promises may also be a means to their own ends. Though direct confrontation is not recommended, it is important to be clear about what you want, need, or expect, and express yourself calmly and gently. Let them know that you’ll fulfil their requests only after they have fulfilled yours. You should also stay consistent and follow through to take your expectations seriously. Dealing with a narcissist isn’t easy, and can actually damage your mental health. So maybe it’s time to rethink about that one friendship of yours that seems to be toxic and consider if it’s really worth it your sanity. Thank you for your attention.
